---
jupyter:
  jupytext:
    formats: ipynb,.md//md
    text_representation:
      extension: .md
      format_name: markdown
      format_version: '1.2'
      jupytext_version: 1.5.2
  kernelspec:
    display_name: Python 3
    language: python
    name: python3
---

# 3 Branches

So far we have concentrated mainly on sequential programs with a single pathway through them, where the flow of control proceeds through the program statements in linear sequence, except when it encounters a loop element. If a loop is encountered, then the control flow is redirected back ‘up’ the program to the start of a loop block.

However, in several of the notebooks, you have also seen how a conditional `if...` statement can be used to optionally pass control to a set of instructions in the sequential program *if* a particular condition is met.

The `if...` statement fits the the sequential program model by redirecting control flow, albeit briefly, to a set of ‘extra’ commands if the conditional test evaluates to true.

A sequential program will always follow the same sequentially ordered path. But to be useful, a robot program will often need to make decisions and behave differently in different circumstances. To do this, the program has to have alternative *branches* in the program flow where it can follow different courses of action depending on some conditional test.

Although the `while` command does appear to offer some sort of branch-like behaviour, we still think of it as a sequential-style operator because the flow of control keeps trying to move in the same forwards direction.

<!-- #region tags=["alert-success"] -->
*In other programming languages, this construct may be referred to as an `if...then...else...`. In Python, the ‘then’ is assumed.*
<!-- #endregion -->

We'll be trying out some conditional statements using `nbtutor` to step through some simple programs as we execute them, so let's load it in now:

```python
%load_ext nbtutor
```

## 3.1 An `if...` without an `else...`

It is sometimes useful to have just a single branch to the `if` statement. Python provides a simple `if...` statement for this purpose, which you may recall from previous notebooks.

<!-- #region activity=true -->
### 3.1.1 Activity – An `if` on its own

Run the following code cell as it stands, with the `x` variable taking the initial value `1` (`x = 1`). Can you predict what will happen?
<!-- #endregion -->

```python activity=true
#%%nbtutor --reset --force
x = 1

print("Are you ready?")

if x == 1:
    print("x equals 1")

print("All done...")
```

<!-- #region activity=true -->
Try to predict what will happen if you change the initial value and run the cell again.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region student=true -->
*Double-click this cell to edit it and record your own prediction*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true -->
Run the code cell above again with a modified initial value. Was your prediction about what would happen correct? Make a note in the cell below about how successful your prediction was. If your prediction was incorrect, try to explain why you think your prediction was different to how the program actually behaved.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region student=true -->
*Double-click this cell to edit it to record notes on the success or otherwise of your own prediction.*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true -->
Uncomment the *%%nbtutor* magic and run the code cell using different values of `x`, observing how the program flow progresses in each case.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true heading_collapsed=true -->
#### Discussion

*Click on the arrow in the sidebar or run this cell to reveal my observations.*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true hidden=true -->
With the initial value of the variable `x` set to `1` (`x = 1`) the program displayed the messages *Are you ready?*, *x equals 1* and *All done...* because the `if...` statement evaluated the `x == 1` test condition as `True` and passed control *into* the `if...` block.

When `x` was initialised to a different value, for example as `x = 2`, only the messages *Are you ready?* and *All done...* were displayed because the `if...` conditional test failed and redirected control flow to the first statement *after* the `if...` block.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region -->
## 3.2 A single branch — `if..else..`

On it's own, an `if` statement will test a condition and, if the condition evaluates as `True` will then evaluate the code block within the if statement, otherwise passing control to the next program statement.

If we wanted to choose alternative actions depending on the evaluation of a particular condition, we *could* create multiple `if` statements, one to handle each outcome:

```python
if raining==True:
    print("Take your coat")
if raining==False:
    print("Looks like a nice day.")
```

Alternatively, we can use an `if..else` statement to take one path if the condition evaluates as `True`, otherwise (`else`) perform the alternative action:

```python
if raining==True:
    print("Take your coat")
else:
    print("Looks like a nice day.")
```

In the branching `if...else...` operator, the program control flow takes one of two different ‘forward-flowing’ paths depending on whether the conditional statement evaluated as part of the `if...` statement evaluates to true or false. If it evaluates to `True`, then the statements in the first if block of code are evaluated; if the condition evaluates to `False`, then the statements in the else block are evaluated. In both cases, control then flows forwards to the next statement after the `if...else...` block.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true -->
### 3.2.1 Activity – Stepping through an `if...else...` statement

In this activity we will look at a simple brancing program to explore how `if...else...` works in more detail. 

If you were to run the following code in a code cell, what do you think will happen?

```python
x = 1

if x == 1:
    print("x equals 1")
else:
    print("x does not equal 1")
    
print("All done...")
```
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region student=true -->
*Double-click this cell to edit it and make your prediction here.*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true -->
Once you have made your prediction, run the following cell. In the cell beneath it, record what happened and how it compared to your prediction.

*You may find it informative to use `nbtutor` to step through each line of code in turn to see how the program flow progresses. To do this, uncomment the `%%nbtutor` magic in the first line of the code cell by deleting the `#` at the start of the line before running the code cell.*
<!-- #endregion -->

```python activity=true
#%%nbtutor --reset --force
x = 1

if x == 1:
    print("x equals 1")
else:
    print("x does not equal 1")
    
print("All done...")
```

<!-- #region student=true -->
*Double-click this cell to edit it to record here what happened when you ran the code in the above cell. Did its behaviour match your prediction?*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true -->
What do you think will happen when you run the following code cell?

Run the cell and use *nbtutor* to step through the program. How does the program flow differ from the case where `x` had the value `1`? 
<!-- #endregion -->

```python activity=true
%%nbtutor --reset --force
x = 2

if x == 1:
    print("x equals 1")
else:
    print("x does not equal 1")

print("All done...")
```

<!-- #region activity=true heading_collapsed=true -->
#### Discussion

*Click the arrow in the sidebar or run this cell to reveal my observations.*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true hidden=true -->
In the cell where `x = 1`, I predicted that the program would print the message *'x equals 1'* and then the messge *'All done...'*.

Viewing the trace, I could see how the program started by initialising the `x` variable to the value `1`, then checked whether `x == 1` (that is, whether `x` was equal to `1`); because it was, the program then moved onto the `print("x equals 1")` statement and printed the first message. Then the program flow continued to the first instruction after the `if...else...` block, which was the statement that printed the *'All done...'* message.

When I ran the program with a value of `x` other then `1`, the control passed from the `if...` statement, where the conditional test evaluated as `False`, to the first line in the `else...` block, which printed the message *'x does not equal 1'*, before moving onto the first line after the `if...else...` block as before.
<!-- #endregion -->

## 3.3 Combining loops and branching statements 

It is important to be clear that the condition in a branching statement (`if...` or `if...else...`) is checked only when execution reaches that part of the program.

In the examples above, you stepped through the programs and saw that execution passed through the `if` statement only once. When creating useful robot programs, we often want conditions to be checked repeatedly. For example the robot may need to repeatedly check that it has not bumped into an obstacle, or whether it has found a bright or dark area. 

You have already seen how the `while...` loop tests a condition at the start of a loop and and then passes control to the statements inside the loop before looping back to test the `while...` condition again.

<!-- #region -->
### 3.3.1 Using conditional statements inside a loop

One commonly used robot programming design pattern is to embed conditional statements with an outer infinite control loop:

```python
# Loop forever
while True:
    
    if condition:
        do_this()
    else:
        do_that()

    if another_condition:
        do_something_else()
```

You may also recall from an earlier notebook that we also used an `if...` statement to return the control flow back to the top of a loop before all the statements in the loop body had been executed, or break out of a loop early and pass control to the first statement after the loop block.

This ability to combine loop and branching statements is very powerful and even a very simple program can produce quite complex robot behaviour.
<!-- #endregion -->

### 3.3.2 Nested `if` statements

Sometimes you may want to develop quite a complicated reasoning path.

In some cases, testing a compounded logical statement using Boolean logic operators may suit our purposes, but we are still limited by the fact that that the conditional test must return a single `True` or `False` value:

```python
weather = 'rain'
temperature = 'cold'

if (weather=='rain') or (temperature=='cold'):
    print("Wear a coat")

if (weather=='rain') and (temperature=='cold'):
    print("...and maybe a scarf too...")
```

In other cases, we may need to make used of a so-called __nested if__ statement, where we build up a ladder of if statements, one inside the other.

For example, with the specified weather conditions, what does the program recommend you do?

```python
weather = 'rain'
temperature = 'warm'
windy = False

if temperature=='warm':
    print("It's warm today...")
    
    if weather=="rain" and not windy:
        print("...but take a brolly")

    if windy:
        print("...and windy enough to fly a kite.")
```

What does it suggest if you change `windy = False` to `windy = True`?

<!-- #region tags=["alert-success"] -->
*Other more elaborate variants of compounded or nested branching statements are supported in other languages, for example in the form of `case` or `switch` statements that can select from multiple courses of action based on the element that is evaluated at the start of the statement.*
<!-- #endregion -->

## 3.4 Multiple conditions using `if...elif...else...`

The `if...else...` statement allows us to creating a branching control flow statement that performs a conditional test and then chooses between two alternative outcomes depending on the result of the test.

Python also supports a yet more complex branch construction in the form of an `if...elif...else...` statement that allows us to make multiple conditional tests. Run the following code cell and use `nbtutor` to explore the flow through the program.

```python
%%nbtutor --reset --force

days_of_week = ['Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday',
                'Friday', 'Saturday', 'Sunday']

for day in days_of_week:
    print(f'Today is {day}...')
    
    if day == 'Wednesday':
        print('...half day closing')
    elif day in ['Saturday', 'Sunday']:
        print('...the weekend')
    else:
        print('...a weekday')
        
print("And that's all the days of the week.")
```
We can also have multiple `elif` statements between the opening `if...` and the closing `else`.

Read through the code in the following code cell. Try to work out what the program will do and how the control flow will pass though the program as it executes before you run the cell and step though the code using `nbtutor`.

```python
%%nbtutor --reset --force

days_of_week = ['Monday', 'Tuesday', 'Wednesday', 'Thursday',
                'Friday', 'Saturday', 'Sunday']

for day in days_of_week:
    message = f'Today is {day}...'
    print(message)
    
    if day == 'Monday':
        feeling = "...I don't like Mondays..."
    elif day == 'Tuesday':
        feeling = '...Ruby Tuesday'
    elif day == 'Friday':
        feeling = "...Friday I'm In Love"
    else:
        feeling = "...I don't know a song title for that day"
    
    print(feeling)
```

Run the previous code cell and step through its execution using *nbtutor*; observe how the control flow steps increasingly through the stack of `...elif...` tests as the `for...` loop iterates through the items in the `days_of_week` list. 


Note that there is no requirement that you test the same variable in each step. The different steps could test a different variable or range of variables.

For example, in the following program we might decide what to take out with us on a walk based on a variety of conditions:

```python
raining = False
temperature = 'warm'

if raining:
    print("Wear boots")
elif temperature == 'warm':
    print("Wear sandals")
else:
    print("Wear shoes")
```

<!-- #region -->
Also note that there is an *order* in which we test the various conditions as the control passes through the `if...elif...` conditional tests. We can use this as an informal way of prioritising one behaviour over another:

```python
if this_really_important_thing:
    ...
elif this_less_important_thing:
    ...
elif this minor_thing:
    ...
else:
    ...
```
<!-- #endregion -->

## 3.5 Using control flow statements in robot programs

Branching operators, when combined with loop based control flow operators, mean we can construct a wide range of control strategies and behaviours for a mobile robot. In the following activities, you will see several such approaches.

In order to get started, we need to load in the RoboLab simulator in the normal way:

```python
from nbev3devsim.load_nbev3devwidget import roboSim, eds

%load_ext nbev3devsim
```

<!-- #region activity=true -->
### 3.5.1 Activity – Detecting black and grey

Using the *Grey\_and\_black* background into the simulator, download the program to the simulator and then run it several times with the robot moved to different starting positions.

What does the program cause the robot to do?
<!-- #endregion -->

```python activity=true
%%sim_magic_preloaded -b Grey_and_black -x 400 -y 200

# Start the robot driving forwards
tank_drive.on(SpeedPercent(50), SpeedPercent(50))

#Sample the light sensor reading
sensor_value = colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity_pc

#Check the light sensor reading
while sensor_value == 100:
    # Whilst we are on the white background
    # update the reading
    sensor_value = colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity_pc
    # and optionally display it
    #print(sensor_value)
    # We also (implicitly) keep driving forwards

# When the reading is below 100
# we have started to see something.
# Drive a little way onto the band to get a good reading
tank_drive.on_for_rotations(SpeedPercent(50),
                            SpeedPercent(50), 0.2)

#Check the sensor reading
sensor_value = colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity_pc
# and optionally display it
#print(sensor_value)

# Now make a decision about what we see
if sensor_value < 50:
    say("I see black")
else:
    say("I see grey")
```

<!-- #region student=true -->
*Double click this cell to edit it and add your description here.*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true heading_collapsed=true -->
#### Example solution

*Click the arrow in the sidebar or run this cell to reveal an example solution.*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true hidden=true -->
The robot moves forward over the white background until it reaches the grey or black area. If the background is black, then the robot says *black*; otherwise, it says *grey*. 

The program works by driving the robot forwards and continues in that direction while it is over the white background (a reflected light sensor reading of 100). When the light sensor reading goes below the white background value of 100, control passes out of the while loop and on to the statement that drives the robot forwards a short distance further (0.2 wheel rotations) to ensure the sensor is fully over the band. The robot then checks its sensor reading again, and makes a decision about what to say based on the value of the sensor reading.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true -->
### 3.5.2 Activity – Combining loops and branching statements 

Can you predict what the following program will cause the robot to do when it is downloaded and run in the simulator using the *Loop* background with the robot initially placed inside the loop ?
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region student=true -->
*Double click this cell to edit it and record your prediction.*
<!-- #endregion -->

```python activity=true
%%sim_magic_preloaded --background Loop -x 500

tank_drive.on(SpeedPercent(30), SpeedPercent(30))

while True:
    if colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity < 100:
        tank_drive.on_for_rotations(SpeedPercent(-30),
                                    SpeedPercent(-30), 2)

        tank_turn.on_for_rotations(-100, SpeedPercent(75), 2)
        tank_drive.on(SpeedPercent(30), SpeedPercent(30))

```

<!-- #region activity=true -->
Download the program to the simulator and run it there to check your prediction. After a minute or two, stop the program from executing.

How does the behaviour of the program lead to the robot’s emergent behaviour in the simulator?
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true heading_collapsed=true -->
#### Example discussion

*Click on the arrow in the sidebar or run this cell to reveal an example discussion.*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true hidden=true -->
When the program runs, the robot will explore the inside of the black oval, remaining inside it and reversing direction each time it encounters the black line.

The program is constructed from an `if` statement inside a *forever* loop. The `if` statement checks the light sensor reading; when this is low (which it will be when the black line is reached) the motor direction is reversed. 

The `while True:` loop is a so-called *infinite loop* that will run indefinitely. In this case it is useful because we want the robot to continue to keep on behaving in the same way as the program runs.

In other circumstances, we might want the loop to continue only while some condition holds true. In such cases, using the `while` statement to test the truth of a conditional statement is more useful.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true -->
### 3.5.3 Challenge – Three shades of grey

An earlier activity provided an example of a program that used an `if...else...` statement to distinguish between black and grey areas. The background (loaded into the simulator as the *Grey\_and\_black* background) actually contains four different shades: black, dark grey, medium grey and light grey. Can you construct a program that will report which shade the robot encounters? 

A copy of the original program is provided below as a starting point. You will need to extend the code so that it can decide between three grey alternatives as well as the black band and say which band it saw.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python activity=true
%%sim_magic_preloaded -b Grey_and_black

# Start the robot driving forwards
tank_drive.on(SpeedPercent(50), SpeedPercent(50))

#Sample the light sensor reading
sensor_value = colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity_pc

#Check the light sensor reading
while sensor_value == 100:
    # Whilst we are on the white background
    # update the reading
    sensor_value = colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity_pc
    # and display it
    print(sensor_value)

# When the reading is below 100
# we have started to see something.
# Drive a little way onto the band to get a good reading
tank_drive.on_for_rotations(SpeedPercent(50), SpeedPercent(50), 0.2)

#Check the sensor reading
sensor_value = colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity_pc
# and display it
print(sensor_value)

# Now make a decision about what we see
if sensor_value < 50:
    say("I see black")
else:
    say("I see grey")
```

<!-- #region activity=true -->
When you have modified the code, run the cell to download it to the simulator, ensure the *Grey\_and\_black* background is loaded, and then run the program in the simulator for various starting positions of the robot. Does it behave as you intended?
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region student=true -->
*Use this cell to record your own notes and predictions related to this challenge.*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true -->
##### Hint: click the arrow in the sidebar or run this cell to reveal a hint.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true -->
The original program uses an `if...else...` condition to distinguish between black and grey reflected light readings. An `...elif...` statement lets you test alternative values within the same `if...else...` block.

To identify the values to use in the condition statements, inspect the simulator output window messages to see what sensor values are reported when the robot goes over different bands.
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true heading_collapsed=true -->
#### Example solution

*Click the arrow in the sidebar or run this cell to display an example solution.*
<!-- #endregion -->

<!-- #region activity=true hidden=true -->
The robot sees the following values over each of the grey bands:

- light grey: ~86
- medium grey: ~82
- dark grey: ~50
- black: 0

Generally, when we see lots of decimal places, we assume that the chances of ever seeing exactly the same sequence of numbers may be unlikely, so rather than testing for an exact match, we use one or more threshold tests to see if the number lies within a particular *range* of values, or is above a certain minimum value.

If we assume those sensor readings are reliable, and the same value is always reported for each of those bands, then we can make the make the following decisions:

```python
if sensor_value > 86: 
    print('light grey')
elif sensor_value > 82: 
    print('medium grey')
elif sensor_value > 50: 
    print('dark grey')
else:
    print('black')
```

We can make the test even more reliable by setting the threshold test values to values that are halfway between the expected values for a particular band. For example, 84, rather than 82, for distinguishing between light and medium grey; 66 rather than 82 for distinguishing between dark and medium grey; and 25 rather than 50 for distinguishing between black and dark grey.

This means that if there is a slight error in the reading, our thresholded test is likely to make the right decision about which side of the threshold value the (noisy) reading actually falls on.

For example, if we have a value of `sensor_value = 86` exactly, the conditional test `sensor_value > 86` will evaluate as `False` because the variable value 86 is not strictly greater than threshold value 86. But if the sensor value is `sensor_value = 86.00000000000000000001`, the test will evaluate as `True`.
<!-- #endregion -->

```python activity=true hidden=true
%%sim_magic_preloaded -b Grey_and_black

# Start the robot driving forwards
tank_drive.on(SpeedPercent(50), SpeedPercent(50))

#Sample the light sensor reading
sensor_value = colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity

#Check the light sensor reading
while sensor_value == 100:
    # Whilst we are on the white background
    # update the reading
    sensor_value = colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity
    # and display it
    print(sensor_value)

# When the reading is below 100
# we have started to see something.
# Drive onto the band to get a good reading
tank_drive.on_for_rotations(SpeedPercent(50), SpeedPercent(50), 0.2)

#Check the sensor reading
sensor_value = colorLeft.reflected_light_intensity
# and display it
print(sensor_value)

# Now make a decision about what we see
if sensor_value >  86: 
    say("I see light grey")
elif sensor_value > 82: 
    say("I see medium grey")
elif sensor_value > 50: 
    say("I see dark grey")
else:
    say("I see black")
```


<!-- #region activity=true hidden=true -->
Other solutions are possible.
<!-- #endregion -->

## 3.6 Noise and variation in real and simulated robots

One thing you might notice is that sometimes the robot may appear to give the "wrong answer" or an answer that diverges from the value you expect, when taking a particular measurement.  For example, if the sensor is not completely over a band it will give a reading that does not exactly match a value you used in your conditional tests.

In a real robot, the sensors are also likely to be subject to various forms of environmental *noise*, such as electrical noise in the sensor, or perturbations in light readings caused by vibrations as the robot moves and slightly changes the height of the reflected sensor above the floor. (Shadows and variations in illumination can also affect light sensor readings.

If you modify the position of the *Light sensor noise* slider in the simulator, you can see how the sensor readings are perturbed according to the amount of noise added.


In the idealised world of a robot simulator, it may at first seem as if we don't have to cope with the messiness of the physical world noise if we don't want to. But even in a simulator, we find there are issues relating to precision in the way numbers are represented. For example, even if we think we have set a variable to a specific value, it may not actually be represented as that value at the machine level, as the following example shows:

```python
point_one = 0.1

# The `format()` function lets us to control
# the output display of a variable
# In the following case, we can display 
# the represented value 0.1 to 20 significant digits
format(point_one, '.20g')
```

You will learn a little bit more about noise, and how to deal with it, later in the module.


## 3.7 Summary

In this notebook, you have seen how `if...` statements can be used to make a variety of decisions and trigger a range of different actions based on one or more tested conditions. In particular:

- a simple `if...` statement lets us perform one or more actions once and once only if a single conditional test evaluates to true
- an `if...else...` statement allows us to *branch* between two possible futures based on the whether a single conditional test evaluates to true; if it is true, do one action, if not, do the other
- an `if...elif...else...` construction lets us run multiple different conditional tests. If the first test is true, do one thing, otherwise test the next thing, and if that is true, do something, otherwise, do another test, and so on. If all the other `elif...` tests evaluate to false, then do the final `else` condition.

In the next notebook, you will have an opportunity to explore a few more ways us using control flow statements in the context of a robot control program.
